Federal Government to provide a further 10 million euro in humanitarian aid for Pakistan - Federal Foreign Office 
    19.08.2010 - Press release
The Federal Government has stepped up its humanitarian aid for the flood victims in Pakistan by a further ten million to currently 25 million euro. Federal Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle today (19 August) issued the following statement:
“The scale of the floods in Pakistan is far greater than originally estimated. We must now assume up to 20 million people are affected.
That is why Federal Minister Dirk Niebel and I have decided to step up the Federal Government’s humanitarian aid for Pakistan by a further 10 million euro. With the help of our partner organizations, we will ensure this aid reaches those most at risk with all speed.
I appeal to the German people to respond generously to this disaster. Your donations can do a great deal to relieve the suffering in Pakistan.”
On 18 August Federal Minister Guido Westerwelle spoke on the telephone with his Pakistan counterpart Mahmood Qureshi, who gave him a detailed description of the situation on the ground as well as the humanitarian and medium- and long-term consequences of the floods.
In the face of this humanitarian crisis the Federal Minister expressed his profound sympathy for the people of Pakistan and promised German assistance and support. He gave an assurance that Germany would stand by Pakistan in its hour of need.
Foreign Minister Qureshi expressed his thanks for the German offer of help. Given the scale of the disaster, Pakistan urgently needed international assistance, he pointed out.
The Federal Foreign Office and the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development are both increasing their assistance by another 5 million euro. This brings Germany’s humanitarian aid for Pakistan from 15 million to currently 25 million euro.
As a member of the European Union and a range of international organizations Germany is also making considerable indirect contributions to the aid effort.

