Foreign Minister Westerwelle in an interview with Financial Times on the NATO's Strategic Concept, Afghanistan und the situation in the eurozone - Federal Foreign Office 
    18.11.2010 - Interview
Source: www.ft.comQuestion: Looking to the Nato summit in Lisbon, are you satisfied with the newstrategic concept, or do you want further amendments?Foreign Minister Westerwelle: Some of Germany ´s core concerns have been taken into account.The proposals made by the Nato secretary-general are a very good basis. Itis clear that Nato sees itself as a political union of values, and also asa defence alliance it supports the need for disarmament and nuclearnonproliferation. The invitation to Russia to take part in a missiledefence system is of historic importance. The fact that President Medvedevwants to go to Lisbon shows how important that invitation is to Russia. Inmy conversations in Moscow with the Russian government, especially withForeign Minister Lavrov, I got the clear impression that they want to studythe details objectively. That alone is huge progress. I can´t anticipatethe speech of President Medvedev. But look, 20 years after Europe wasreunited after the fall of the (Berlin) Wall, Nato is making an offer toRussia to take part in a defence and security project. There are threepossible responses: to reject it out of hand; to accept it unchecked; or toengage in constructive discussions. That Russia has decided on the thirdway is very welcome.Question: Will the allies themselves agree?Nothing is agreed until everything is agreed.Question: Do you think that agreement on a missile defence system will openthe way to further nuclear disarmament?The American government under President Obama has set thecourse with its nuclear posture review. That reduces the strategicimportance of nuclear weapons. As long as there are nuclear weapons in theworld, we in our defence alliance will have to rely on nuclear deterrence.But the way to a nuclear free world depends on confidence-building throughnuclear and other forms of disarmament. After a decade of setbacks fordisarmament, our initiatives seemed to be little more than a trickle. Nowwe´ve got a considerable tide moving. 
In New York we founded a group ofstates from all regions of the world that feel particularly committed tothe goals of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation - Japan, Australiaand Germany are in the lead. And this time the nuclear non-proliferationconference in New York was a success, unlike when it last met five yearsago. The new Start treaty has been agreed. We are counting on its beingratified by the US and Russia. So the debate over nuclear zero is in fullflow round the world. Why are disarmament and nuclear disarmament soimportant? Because they are a commitment that gives us the authority todemand nuclear non-proliferation (from others). Disarmament and nuclearnon-proliferation are two sides of the same coin. If we in the West, if thenuclear powers, disarm, then they will be much more credible in insistingthat other states should not acquire nuclear weapons.Question: But the Americans do not wish to withdraw their medium-rangemissiles from Germany, as you want.I can only respect and applaud the American government forgiving momentum to the disarmament debate. The vision of a nuclear zerowhich the American president talked about in his outstanding speech inPrague is now part of that debate. And that is why I am very happy aboutthe close partnership both with the USA and in particular with my Americancounterpart Hillary Clinton. The nuclear non-proliferation treaty is basedon three pillars.1.Anyone can use nuclear energy if they are committed to internationaltransparencyand co-operation.2.The nuclear powers will disarm, so that3.the international community can demand with special authority that no oneelse arms themselves with nuclear weapons.Question: Do you not have a problem with France over your desire to have anarms control committee set up within Nato, while the French want to stressthe importance of nuclear weapons in the new strategic doctrine?
I would not describe it as a problem, but rather as anecessary discussion in preparation for convergence of different,historically based points of view. France has been a nuclear power fordecades, just like Britain, and naturally has a different attitude when itcomes to the role of nuclear weapons to what we have for example inGermany. We have learned the lessons of our history. But at the G8 summitin 2009, France also recognised the goal of a world without nuclearweapons. So the fct that we need to discuss the question is perfectlynormal. 
We are 28 Nato member states, and naturally they need to bringtheir different positions closer together. Let me tell you straight out:the Nato strategic concept will protect our common security interests, andaddress new challenges, stress our community of values, and - reallyrevolutionary for a defence alliance - also emphasise the role ofdisarmament for global security. Every concept sets a goal and at the sametime amounts to an agreement on common action. That is why it is astrategic concept. The last Nato concept was agreed in 1999. After Lisbonyou should just do one thing: look at the old concept of 1999 beside thenew concept. I am sure that the role of disarmament will clearly be givenmore weight.Question: Is there not a danger that this new concept will push Nato in thedirection of become a global policeman. Am I justified in fearing that?We are sticking to the core commitment of Nato in Article V.That means we will defend ourselves in the case of any armed attack. We arenot going to water that down. But it is equally clear that everything Natodoes in the future will be in accordance with international law. Ourbehaviour is in accordance with international law. 
There are certainly newthreats that have arisen that we did not foresee in previous years, such asterrorist threats, or the danger of the spread of weapons of massdestruction. That should not just be considered from the point of view ofstates arming themselves and therefore making whole regions unstable. Ontop of that, the more countries that acquire nuclear weapons, the greateris the danger of terrorist groups or other criminal organisations gettingtheir hands on nuclear weapons potential. And 20 people with one atom bombis an army.Question: But is it the job of Nato to find these people and destroy them?We have been fighting together against terrorism for a longtime, including on the instructions of the United Nations. We and many ofthe other Nato member states are in Afghanistan with a UN mandate. That wasthe difference with the war in Iraq. We are in Afghanistan on the basis ofa Un decision, clearly based on international law.Question: Is Gaza the sort of place you can see Nato operating in apeacekeeping capacity?
I think that regional conflict resolution must stem from theparties to the conflict, and above all must be supported by the UN. The UNis an organisation, especially the Security Council, that gets involvedaround the world in the solution of regional conflicts and the promotion ofregional stability. In my view, the UN role cannot be replaced by any othersort of defence alliance.Question: But when is a terrorist attack part of a regional conflict, and whenis it an attack on Nato itself?You can´t say that abstractly or theoretically. One must judgeon a caseby- case basis. What we are working on is conflict prevention,above all else.Question: That is an integral part of it. The new strategic concept is part ofthe worldwide reaction to September 11……and a great deal more. We have so many new challenges. Thedanger of weapons of mass destruction, the danger of computer attacks,so-called asymmetric threats. And moreover, we haven´t just got Article V,we also have Article IV, for example regarding consultation in thealliance.Question: You have talked of computer wars, and I must confess that I amastonished that this strategic concept does not attempt to change Article Vto allow for mutual defence against computer attacks.The debates will only take place when we get to Lisbon. Wemight as well give up the summit if I tell you about the whole concept now!Question: But how are we going to deal with computer wars, how can we organiseourselves against them? As you said, that is one of the big new dangers. Wealready saw that in Estonia and in Georgia, and interestingly most recentlyin Iran. What should the Nato summit do to defend us all against thisdanger?Well that is precisely the sort of question which requiresinternational co-operation, even beyond Nato. I am no technical expert, andalso no computer specialist who can give you a practical answer. We havealso had a thorough discussion of this in our federal government, what weshould do against such computer attacks. In American or British English youseem to speak very easily of war. I would avoid that. You speak of war…Question: Like cyber war…Precisely, and I speak rather of computer attacks, because theword war is more easily and frequently used in English. You have a waragainst climate change, don´t you?Question: Yes.In English one talks rather easily about a war against this orthat. In Germany we are very cautious about using the word war. That is whywe don´t speak of a computer war, but of computer attacks.Question: Or of armed conflicts?Certainly not! We are speaking of attacks. The precisetranslation simply has another resonance, the meaning is more loaded. It´sno wonder. I am speaking of computer attacks, and we will naturally alsodiscuss these questions. That is why I pointed out that we don´t just haveArticle V. There are also further questions of cooperation andconsultation, that is all part of it.Question: But in Estonia the whole financial and government system came undercomputer attacks. And Estonia was already a Nato member, but Nato could notdo anything about it.Perhaps so, because we must first become more technicallycompetent to defend with such new challenges. But that is not the job ofheads of state and government, or for foreign ministers, or even defenceministers. We have to agree on a strategy. We determine that there is achallenge that concerns our security, and then naturally we must talk aboutthe details of how we find an appropriate answer, which should beproportional, efficient and focussed.Question: If it is clear that such attacks come from Russia, how is itpossible to have a closer cooperation with the Russians?I know of suspicions, but no proof.Question: Can I ask you about Afghanistan? It is clear that the Germanpopulation is not enthusiastic about this “armed conflict”. How long canyou ensure the population still supports your involvement? How long can youstay in the country?In Lisbon we will begin the process of handing overresponsibility, by making it clear that next year we will hand overresponsibility for security to Afghanistan and Afghan authorities in thefirst provinces. As we agreed in London and Kabul, we want to have handedover responsibility for security entirely to the Afghan government during2014. 
So we are opening up a perspective of withdrawal. If we begin to handover responsibility for security in the coming months, that should not beconfused with beginning a troop withdrawal, but as a precondition formaking our withdrawal possible one day in the future.Question: The Americans say that we Europeans do not do enough to convince ourvoters that this war is worthwhile. Is the future of Nato itself notendangered by the war in Afghanistan?I see a lot of shadows and many setbacks - especially with thesecurity situation. But I also see some light and many good developments.Take the elections, which are part of good governance: Naturally theelections are rightly criticised because of attempts at manipulation, butthe good thing is what is happening from Afghanistan itself. It isimportant progress that the first mandates that were awarded because ofmanipulation at the count were immediately cancelled. These were the firstelections in Afghanistan that took place under Afghan supervision. Therewas not only higher voter participation, but also a lot of complaints fromthe population itself, from Afghans themselves, and the Afghan authoritiesdrew their conclusions. They cancelled elections that were won throughmanipulation, and that is remarkable. 
I find it healthy that Germans have afundamentally sceptical attitude towards foreign (military) deployments.That is because of the dreadful first half of the last century. At the sametime, Germans live up to their international responsibility in an exemplaryfashion, considering for example that they are the third largest supplierof international troops. 
Both parties in the government have stated thatthey support the intervention in Afghanistan, and they have a majority forthat view. The same people who are inwardly sceptical about foreignmilitary interventions - which I find a justified view - have alsorecognised the necessity and given those parties a big majority insupporting the Afghan intervention. Both poles shape our foreign policy:the culture of military restraint, and at the same time, the recognition ofour international responsibility. Germany is an excellent model in that.Question: Has Germany changed in the past 20 years, since unification? Iremember Helmut Kohl saying he could not conceive of a German soldierserving in the Balkans.Yes. Germany has changed since reunification. This process hasbeen strenuously thought through both in society and in the democraticprocess. If you think of our engagement in the western Balkans, that´s agood example of how successful the intervention of our soldiers can by instabilising the situation, for we were able to reduce our troop numbers inKFOR massively, from 8,500 to just 2,500 today. 
In the meantime, President Tadic has worked through a policy changetowards Kosovo. In Vukovar, in Croatia, he made a remarkable speechapologising for the massacre committed by Serbian troops. 
So things are moving in the right direction there. Iwould also mention the fight against pircy. The impression is given thereas if it was just a question of economic interests. If it´s a question ofprotecting our shipping ands therefore ensuring that aid can get to Africa.That was the starting point of the exercise, and it is succeeding.Question: But in terms of power projection internationally, do you thinkGermans really believe in it? Or will there be a great battle in societyover every future military intervention, wherever it may be?I have just said I am happy that we have a healthy scepticismtowards military interventions of the Bundeswehr. There is nothing wrongwith that. Some foreign politicians may see it as a lack of firmness, butonly if they have not really studied the darkest chapter in our history.Unlike most of our alliance partners, we have a parliamentary army. Thatmeans that every foreign intervention must be approved by our parliament -with a proposal from the government, but decided by the parliament. All ourfriends in the world should be happy that Germany has drawn its lessonsfrom history, and not just in the federal constitution, with its principleof a parliamentary army rather than a government army, but also it is avital element in society, given the readiness both to take internationalresponsibility, and to have a healthy scepticism and a culture of militaryrestraint that lies deep in the hearts of our people. I am proud of boththings.Question: In Brussels many people are saying that Germany has also changed itsattitude towards Europe since reunification - that Germany is more insistent on itsnational interests, and has become very tough in the whole saga of theeurozone crisis. What would you say about that?
In the preamble of the constitution of the German FederalRepublic stand the two core principles of its foreign policy: to servepeace in the world in a united Europe. Because of that, Germany won a twothirds majority outright in the UN, against two very respectablecandidates, in the first vote (for a seat on the Security Council), becausewe have made multilateralism and European integration our politicalprinciples. 
In my first year as foreign minister I visited all the Europeanmember states, and not just big France and Britain, or Poland, Italy andSpain, but also others like Luxembourg, the three Baltic states and Malta.We regard our European policy as a partnership on the same level for allmember states, whether they are bigger or smaller, and whether they areeconomically more successful or unfortunately for a while rather lesssuccessful.Question: But what about this agreement in Deauville between France andGermany: all the rest had to fall in with it. Don´t you think you stressyour relationship with France too much in an enlarged EU?At the very beginning of my time in office, I revived theso called Weimar triangle. That is the close partnership between France,Poland and Germany. This Weimar triangle has become an important motor inthe EU, alongside the close partnership between France and Germany that hasgrown up over decades.Question: But the eurozone is different?As far as the stability culture is concerned we have manyallies precisely amongst those who joined the EU in the last years.Question: But the Poles weren´t happy about the Deauville deal with France.What counts is what was finally agreed.Question: Are you happy with that?
I am happy that the Chancellor was able to successfullynegotiate what we agreed in the cabinet after Deauville would be thenegotiating mandate. Three points are most important. First, thatviolations of responsible budget planning do not remain unpunished, andpolitical opportunism must as far as possible not interfere with impositionof sanctions. 
I am one of those who, as a member of the opposition in theBundestag, criticised the relaxation of the stability pact – at Germany´sinstigation - in 2004/5 as a historic mistake. Unfortunately the partiesthat were in government then, and are now in opposition, have refused tosupport the solution to the problems caused by their own mistaken decision.Second, the creation of a crisis mechanism, which will not be a (EU)community instrument, because that would mean creating a form of legalliability that would not be acceptable in our German legal system. 
Third, we do not want to relieve private creditors of their responsibility.Those who bet against countries, and loses those bets, and yet can gohome with their profits untouched, they won´t be let off. That must change.Question: Do you agree with the Chancellor that if the Euro fails, then Europewill fail?
Neither the euro, nor Europe, will fail. That is why theChancellor and I as foreign minister are working for its success. I am aEuropean patriot.Question: What does that mean?It means that I am one of the first politicians in the countrywho is happy to say publicly that I am proud of my country - and that waslong before the World Cup in 2006. I see Germany as embedded in a Europe ofvalues and co-operation. For me Europe is much more than a common currency,and far more than a system to ensure our welfare at a time ofglobalisation, much more than an internal market and the freedom to travel.
For me, Europe is a community of values. It is a political union thatserves both peace and freedom. Therefore the euro is a currency of freedom,and not just a means of exchange. The European model of co-operation isdemanding, arduous, nerve-wracking even, and the negotiations often go onall night. And the European model of co-operation also costs money,although a lot less than it would cost to eliminate the sort of conflictsthat regularly occurred in past centuries. The model of co-operation hastaken over from the model of confrontation. And that is an unbelievablegood fortune for our generation. You are sitting here in a building aroundwhich everything was bombed to bits in the war. You are sitting in a placethat was the source of oppression in a socialist dictatorship. In one hourby car you can be in Poland, and there are no more border conflicts. 
For the first time since Germany existed, it is surrounded by friendly stateswho have organised themselves under a single European roof. Anyone who doesnot love Europe can´t be helped. They´re just thoughtless. If you takeEurope for granted, then you will begin to lose it, and that isextraordinarily dangerous. I see disturbing tendencies towardsrenationalisation, regrettably both in Europe and in many countries of theworld. But it is our task to oppose this tendency wherever it may be found.Question: But I read some awful articles in Bild Zeitung about Greece earlierthis year. That worried me a bit.I ask you: there are always debates and bad ideas, in bar-roomconversations and in the media, but we are talking now about responsiblepolicy. You must have a clear compass, and mine has one clear co-ordinate,and that is Europe.Question: One last question: were you not rather disappointed that PresidentObama said in Delhi that he supported India´s desire to become a permanentmember of the UN Security Council? He has never said it about Germany.President Obama was speaking to the Indian and not the Germanparliament. If he had not supported India for the Security Council in hisspeech, it would have been a strange omission. I expect that he will make asimilarly friendly remark in Japan, where he is going at the end of theweek.Question: And then you´ll invite him to the Bundestag?When he next has time to visit Germany I will be delighted tohear the friendly words that President Obama, a man I greatly admire, willfind for both Brazil and Germany.
(The questions were posed by Quentin Peel and Gerritt Wiesmann)

